Persistent Identifier Mint
==========================

The [Uniform Resource Identifier](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2396) (URI)
is one of the earliest and most consequent specifications of the Semantic Web.
Originally meant to identify web resource, it became a central piece on the Web
of data concept with the [Resource Description
Framework](https://www.w3.org/TR/WD-rdf-schema/) (RDF). In time researchers
understood not only its relevance providing unique and universal identifiers to
data, but also the importance of their longevity, past the life-time of
projects, organisations or institutions. Thus emerged the concept of Persistent
Unique Identifier (PI or PID, i.e. a URI valid "for ever") and its recognition
[as the foundation](https://doi.org/10.1162/dint_a_00025) of the Semantic Web
and the [FAIR
initiative](https://fairsfair.eu/d22-fair-semantics-first-recommendations-request-comments/p-rec-1-use-globally-unique-persistent-and).

Within the SoilWise project, the persistent identification of meta-data records
(and eventually the resources those meta-data describe) is therefore a
fundamental aspect. The process or technology responsible for issuing and
assigning PIDs has heretofore been known as "Persistent Identifier Mint". In
principle it will rely on a third party for the long term persistence of PIDs.
The paragraphs below enumerate various options in this regard.



ePIC
----

[Persistent Identifiers for eResearch](https://www.pidconsortium.net/) (ePIC)
was founded in 2009 by a consortium of European partners in order to provide PID
services for the European Research Community, based on the [Handle
system](https://www.handle.net/). Consortium members signed a Memorandum of
Understanding aiming to provide the necessary resources for the long term
reliability for its PID services. ePIC has since expanded into an international
consortium, open to partners from the research community worldwide.

ePIC provides services for the allocation and resolution of PIDs, thus
redirecting to the SoilWise Repository. These PIDs can be used internally to
identify meta-data records, knowledge graphs in quad-stores and even as
alternative identifiers of external resources.


ARK Alliance
------------

The [ARK Alliance](https://arks.org/) is an open global community supporting the
ARK infrastructure on behalf of research and scholarship. This institution
provides Archival Resource Keys (ARKs), that serve as persistent identifiers, or
stable, trusted references for digital information objects, physical or
abstract. ARKs are meant to provide researchers (and other users) with long term
access to the global scientific and cultural record. Since 2001 some 8.2
milliard ARKs have been created by over 1000 organisations â€” libraries, data
centres, archives, museums, publishers, government agencies and vendors. The ARK
Alliance strives for the seamless access to PID services, on an open,
non-paywalled and decentralised paradigm.
 






